 out of a metal blade attached to a limited tool.
 Similarly, an argument can be thought of as a tool
 that's used to provide reasons
 in support of a particular view.
 And it is made out of sentences, statements,
 or propositions called premises that support a conclusion.
 So we'll adopt the following definition.
 An argument is a connected series of sentences
 called premises that are intended to provide reasons
 for evidence in support of the truth
 of another sentence called a conclusion.
 Here's an example.
 In this example, we have two premises
 which are intended to provide support for the conclusion.
 Notice that I've denoted the difference
 between the premises and the conclusion
 using this adaptation.
 So, sorry, I lost track of your line.
 The houses, the creation.
 The non-exec, technical difficulties, quip clause.
 Try this.
 Yeah.
 Cool.
 Okay.
 Yes.
 So P1 and P2 here are denoted premises one and two.
 C denotes the conclusion.
 For completeness here,
 I've just added the justification for the conclusion.
 So the conclusion C follows from premises one and two.
 Okay.
 So, what about this?
 What about the following?
 Is this an argument?
 So person A says cheese is the best food
 and person B says cheese is disgusting.
 What do you think?
 Argument?
 I'm seeing some head shakes, boos.
 No, right?
 Not an argument.
 This is just a disagreement.
 So, right, an argument in the sense of the word
 that we're applying in a class
 is a series of sentences, right?
 And they're connected and they're intended
 to perform the truth of the other sentence
 which is the conclusion.
 So, today we'll focus exclusively on deductive arguments.
 In a deductive argument,
 the conclusion should be guaranteed by the premises.
 In the reason for the first day of class,
 we encounter inductive arguments, right?
 So recall that for an inductive argument,
 the conclusion is just paid likely by the premises.
 It's not guaranteed as it is for a deductive argument.
 You might remember this example
 from the Godfrey Smith reading from Tuesday.
 This is an example of a good inductive argument.
 So it says, I will one observe that time T one is green.
 I will two observe that time T two is green.
 I will three observe that time T three is green and so on.
 Right, and so you make that inductive step
 and you conclude that all emeralds are green
 on the basis that within everything you've seen,
 it's more than likely or this conclusion seems very likely,
 namely that all emeralds are green.
 Note that double line under the premises.
 So this is just one way to signal
 that the argument being made
 is an inductive one and not deductive.
 So while we're on the topic of notation,
 just note that we're saying the same argument in this way.
 So all the emeralds that we observed in other circumstances
 at almost different times that we were mentioning earlier
 and maybe different places prior to,
 let's say, April 4th, 2024 have been green
 and therefore all emeralds are green.
 So we just sort of compile
 all of those different observations
 into like one more general statement of which
 we're gonna go into today.
 So that's just a minor point on notation.
 But our topic for today is not inductive arguments,
 it's deductively valid arguments.
 So we'll set inductive arguments aside
 and we'll want to hammer home the concepts
 of deductive validity and counter examples
 to deductively invalid arguments.
 So we consider the following example.
 All women are mortal, Alex is a woman,
 therefore, Alex is mortal.
 This is an example of a deductive argument.
 So the conclusion is guaranteed by the premises.
 That is, if the premises are true,
 then the conclusion must be true.
 I want to point out something else, right?
 So notice that we don't need to really know anything else
 about the world in order to conclude that Alex is mortal.
 Just given, right, if we grant premises one and two,
 C just sort of falls out deductively.
 So this can be seen more clearly
 if you put the argument in generic form.
 So, right, all women are mortal, Alex is a woman,
 therefore, Alex is mortal.
 This sort of way of putting things might help you
 if you're ever sort of stumbling
 with the more complicated bits of content.
 So we say that an argument is deductively valid, right,
 when it's not possible for all the premises to be true
 and for the conclusion to be false, okay?
 So are we following along so far?
 More or less?
 Cool.
 Okay, so in everyday speech, right,
 people use the word valid to evaluate things
 like your opinions, so you might say you're a friend,
 that her opinion is valid.
 This is fine, you know, your daily life,
 but it's not how we're gonna use the term in this class,
 and, you know, it's not typically the way
 that you use the term in really any philosophy class.
 So I wanna emphasize that validity does not apply
 to single sentences, statements, or claims.
 This is a common mistake that people make,
 so let's just make sure we get clear on this early on.
 Validity is a notion that applies to arguments,
 so, right, those series of statements
 that are put together in this way
 that's suggestive of we're giving reason
 to support of a conclusion.
 Okay, so in this context, validity is a technical notion.
 It applies to arguments.
 An argument is valid if and only if, right?
 It's not possible that all the premises are true,
 and the conclusion is false.
 Alternatively, we can say that if the premises are true,
 the just sort of granting that these premises are true,
 the conclusion must be true,
 so let's go through a few examples.
 So this argument says P1, every UCLA student is a student.
 Pick out a UCLA student, so I've picked out Jane.
 She's a UCLA student, and we can conclude,
 just from those two things, that Jane is a student, right?
 So is it valid or invalid?
 - Valid. - Valid, right?
 It's not possible that these two things are true,
 and the conclusion is false.
 All right, what about this one?
 Some students love to read.
 Everybody who loves to read is cool.
 Therefore, some students are cool, valid or invalid?
 - Valid. - Valid.
 - What?
 (audience laughs)
 I'll put my eyes.
 Is it valid or invalid?
 - Valid. - Valid.
 - Valid. - Valid, good.
 So it's valid, right?
 If all the premises are true,
 then the conclusion must be true, valid.
 You might have thought to yourself,
 look, I know some people who love to read,
 and they're most definitely not cool.
 Right, what's going on here?
 Notice, right, that validity is only one way
 of evaluating an argument.
 So to assess validity, we suppose
 that all the premises are true, and we ask,
 is the conclusion guaranteed by these premises?
 Another way to evaluate arguments is to ask
 whether those premises are, in fact, true.
 So assessing the truth value of an individual premise
 is a different kind of assessment.
 So here we have the same argument before,
 but now it's in the generic form.
 But before, P1 says some students are reading lovers.
 I just kind of changed it up so that I could more easily
 put it in the generic form, but it has the same meaning.
 So some students are reading lovers.
 All reading lovers are cool, so some students are cool.
 Well, you can tell from this argument,
 you can tell from this argument's form alone
 that it's valid.
 We don't need to know anything about students
 or about people who love reading or about people, right,
 to know that this argument is valid.
 We just have placeholders here
 for these different variables that might go in.
 We don't need to know anything about that world.
 What's important for validity is just the argument's form.
 Now, unlike with validity, assessing the truth value
 of a particular premise involves actually knowing stuff
 about the world, right?
 So let's try it.
 P1 says all women are mortal, true or false?
 True, right?
 I mean, it would be pretty cool if we found
 what that was in, but so far, we're gonna go with true.
 Let's suppose that the Alex in question here is me.
 So I'm a woman, so Alex is a woman, true or false?
 True. True.
 And now we've seen this argument before
 and we know that it's deductively valid.
 We saw it in the generic form.
 So again, with validity, we say that if the premises
 are true, then the conclusion must be true.
 So now we can actually check that box
 and the premises are in fact true.
 And so, oops, oops.
 If the conclusion, sorry, is guaranteed by its four,
 then we know that the conclusion is in fact true.
 Or we can just put it this way, right?
 Since the argument's valid, the truth is guaranteed.
 Okay, notice though, that on another reading
 of this same argument, premise two might come out false.
 So if we're talking about a different Alex
 who isn't a woman, like for example, Alex Holland,
 the insane free- climber guy who soloed El Cap, right?
 Not a woman.
 Or maybe we're talking about Alex Trebek,
 the voice of jeopardy, also not a woman.
 Or maybe we're talking about good old Alex the Great,
 the king of ancient Greece, you know, ancient Greece,
 the king of Macedonia or Macedon who, right, fun fact,
 was a student of the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle.
 Of course, Alex the Great, also not a woman.
 So Trebek and the Great are both dead now, RIP.
 Connell, well, the whole reason that this photo
 makes us so nervous is precisely the fact
 that he's mortal, right?
 He can fall and die, it's crazy.
 So the sentence or the claim, Alex is mortal, is true, right?
 But notice it's not true for the reasons
 that are given by this argument.
 The Alex who's mortality we're discussing is not a woman.
 So, though the argument is valid,
 so long as we're talking about an Alex who is a man,
 the argument is not sound.
 At least one of the premises is false.
 So, now we have more than one way of evaluating arguments.
 When we're assessing validity,
 we don't care whether the premises are actually true.
 Remember, when we're assessing validity,
 we're just asking, if the premises were true,
 would it be possible for the conclusion to be false, right?
 So this argument is valid because if Alex Honnold
 actually was a woman,
 then the conclusion would be guaranteed by the premises.
 It's valid by virtue of its form.
 Yet, even though it's valid,
 this version of the argument includes a false premise.
 Premise two.
 So we say that the argument is valid given its form,
 but it's unsound because at least
 one of the premises is false.
 So, just to sort of reiterate that,
 an argument is sexically good when it is valid
 and when its premises are true.
 When an argument satisfies both these conditions,
 we say that it's sound.
 So, the argument which takes me as the Alex is valid
 and all of the premises are true, so is sound.
 The argument which takes Honnold as the Alex
 is valid, but not all the premises are true,
 so it's not sound.
 All right, that was kind of a lot of information.
 But since our topic for today
 is really just deductive validity,
 it's not necessarily truth or soundness,
 I just thought, you know, I'm not too familiarized,
 those of us who maybe haven't taken the first logic courses
 or maybe are new to philosophy,
 with these other ways of evaluating arguments.
 But since our topic for today
 is really just deductive validity,
 let's turn our focus back to evaluating arguments
 on just those grounds.
 So, let's set truth and soundness aside.
 So, just remember that when we're assessing validity,
 don't care about the actual truth.
 We're just assessing whether if it were true,
 if it were true that both of these premises were true,
 then is it possible for the conclusion to be false?
 If the argument's valid, then the answer should be no, right?
 Do we see that?
 Do we like getting a hang of things?
 More or less, yeah?
 - Are deductive validity valid arguments
 in sort of self-contained systems?
 - Good, so yeah, so you wanna sort of think of,
 again, like when I said earlier,
 you don't wanna import other knowledge
 that you know about the world, right?
 So, for instance, if we go back a bit,
 to this argument.
 So, actually, I'm gonna introduce a caveat
 to what would have been my answer.
 So, when you're, I think your question applies better
 to evaluating soundness rather than validity,
 and here's why.
 So, when we're asking about whether an argument is valid,
 all we're looking at is does the conclusion follow
 from the supposed true of these two premises
 and nothing else, right?
 So, in that way, even when we're assessing validity,
 we're restricting our knowledge of the world
 to just these two premises.
 But furthermore, when we're assessing soundness, right?
 So, when we're assessing, look,
 are these premises actually true?
 We don't want to import a sentence that says,
 Alex is a woman, P3.
 Alex is, the Alex that we're talking about
 is Alex Villayas or something like this.
 It's Alex that's my TA.
 Or introducing my last name or something into P2.
 We don't wanna sort of,
 we might do that mentally,
 but that's sort of something that you want to avoid.
 Just restrict yourself, just as you said,
 to those, your knowledge of the world's now confined
 to those two premises.
 Thank you.
 Are there more questions?
 Cool.
 Okay, so let's fast forward a bit.
 Where are we?
 Oh, whoops.
 So, remember, when we're assessing validity,
 we don't care about actual truth,
 we're just assessing whether, if the premises are true,
 then would it be possible for the conclusion to be false?
 If it's not possible, the argument's valid.
 Okay.
 So, now, okay.
 Maybe I'm biased, but I'm finding it fun
 to talk about arguments featuring Alex's.
 So, you know, what about Alexander Skarsgård,
 who plays Lucas Madison on Succession?
 Anyone seen that?
 Fantastic show, yeah, right, come on.
 Okay, well, he's also the son of the famous actor
 Stellan Skarsgård, I don't know,
 more fun facts, very talented family.
 Who plays Baron Harkon in the new Doom movies, all right?
 No?
 Okay.
 Those are all so fantastic.
 And so, this is something that you might give an argument
 for, right, these Doom movies rock.
 So, let's have a look.
 All movies that Alex likes are fantastic.
 You might not think that's true,
 but remember, ignoring the truth.
 Alex likes June Part Two,
 therefore, June Part Two is fantastic.
 Is it valid or invalid?
 Valid.
 Sorry, what?
 Valid.
 Valid, awesome, valid.
 Proud of you, guys.
 Okay, suppose every philosopher liked the new Doom movies,
 and suppose Alex likes the new Doom movies,
 if both of these were true,
 would it be possible for the conclusion to be false?
 Nope.
 Yes.
 Yes, right?
 Invalid.
 Okay, notice that, if Alex is me,
 then the conclusion is true.
 Nevertheless, the conclusion does not follow
 from one and two, so the argument's invalid.
 This is maybe easier to see if you put it
 in a generic form.
 So, again, the question...
 Oh, sorry, I don't know how to control that.
 Was that it?
 It happens sometimes.
 Oh!
 Are you sure everything's...
 That's a good signal.
 Can we just adopt that convention,
 where it's like, not up?
 Okay, cool.
 Thank you.
 If the board doesn't wanna cooperate,
 what are we gonna do with them?
 So...
 What's that?
 (muffled speaking)
 (muffled speaking)
 It happened several times.
 (muffled speaking)
 He unplugged it and replugged it.
 (muffled speaking)
 (muffled speaking)
 (muffled speaking)
 (muffled speaking)
 (muffled speaking)
 Okay, we're back.
 We're back.
 Okay, so the question here,
 which Alex we're talking about,
 it only matters for soundness, not validity, remember?
 We're looking at the argument's form.
 We're talking about validity, like writing this up.
 If you do, if all you knew were one and two,
 you wouldn't be able to conclude
 that Alex is a philosopher.
 All the knowledge that you have in the world
 comes from the premises.
 Remember that.
 Okay, so having more fun with Dune.
 I don't know if any of you guys saw it,
 but it's a great thing, so.
 In Dune, I don't know if you're familiar with this,
 but SPICE is this valuable resource
 and it's got all these benefits,
 so you get enhanced cognitive abilities
 and space navigation and stuff like that,
 extended lifespan, so.
 But at the same time, it causes a lot of problems,
 so the extraction of it has all these really unfavorable
 social and political effects,
 and it also disturbs the planet of Arrakis since psychology,
 so it's the both harms and good that come with it.
 This argument says if SPICE production
 brings about more harm than good,
 so that would be more of Arrakis, also called the famine,
 then it's wrong.
 SPICE production brings about more harm than good.
 Therefore, SPICE production is wrong.
 What do we think?
 Nice.
 It's crowded.
 Good job.
 So it's not possible for P1 and P2 to be true
 and the conclusion to be false.
 What about this one?
 It's similar to the previous, but there's a key difference,
 so P1 stays the same.
 If SPICE production brings about more harm than good
 to the famine, then it's wrong.
 P2 states that SPICE production does not bring about
 more harm than good to the famine.
 Okay, then we conclude that C,
 SPICE production is not wrong.
 Valid or invalid?
 - Invalid. - Invalid.
 - Invalid, right?
 Okay, so this argument is invalid
 because the conclusion does not follow logically
 from the premises, right?
 So even if these premises were true,
 the conclusion isn't guaranteed.
 Why not?
 Okay, bear with me.
 Notice that P1 is establishing this kind of conditional
 if-then relationship.
 So there's a conditional relationship
 between harm and wrongness.
 But notice that in P2, that relationship isn't addressed.
 So P2 just says that SPICE production
 does not bring about more harm than good.
 But all this argument tells us about
 is what happens when it does bring about
 more harm than good, right?
 It doesn't tell us about what happens when it doesn't.
 So it's a kind of gap rule, right?
 So in other words, even if both these premises were true,
 we can't just jump to the conclusion, sorry,
 we can't just jump to the conclusion
 that SPICE production is not wrong,
 'cause we don't read another conclusion.
 So, oop, sorry, it's invalid.
 You guys got that right.
 So there might be some other reason
 why SPICE production is wrong that just isn't mentioned here.
 Yeah?
 - So if the conclusion didn't make the generalization
 and all of the different conditions would be valid,
 like you mentioned the term, I don't know.
 So if the conclusion was SPICE production
 is not wrong and then it mentioned the impact conclusion
 instead of just generalizing it would be valid?
 'Cause you're saying the conclusion is a generalization.
 - So we just haven't gotten enough evidence, right?
 So we're restricting our knowledge of the world
 to just P1 and two, and sorry.
 We're restricting our knowledge of the world
 to just P1 and two, and given those two premises,
 we just don't have enough information
 to be able to then conclude
 that SPICE production is not wrong.
 So it's like, we sort of need to hear more,
 like P2 is maybe some kind of consideration
 that could play a role in a larger argument
 for like, SPICE production isn't wrong,
 and both of these premises are making a clear role.
 But we wanna hear about something
 that actually brings up,
 if we're restricting ourself to just P1 and two,
 we're gonna wanna hear about what would make it wrong.
 We don't really know yet.
 Or we, sorry, not what would make it wrong,
 'cause P1 does sort of touch on that.
 But we would need a premise that says like,
 such and such actually,
 well, given the way that P1,
 we just need to add more premises.
 Okay, so if P1 said, then that is the only way
 it could be wrong, would that be valid then?
 Oh, so if it was an if and only if.
 Yeah.
 Yeah, yeah.
 Okay.
 Oh, sorry, more questions?
 Yeah.
 Okay.
 So,
 counterexamples can sometimes be a more intuitive way.
 So I've been like putting the examples in the generic form,
 and sometimes that can help, right?
 So just sort of notice what the form of the argument is
 in its basic outline.
 But counterexamples are often an intuitive way
 of demonstrating invalidity.
 So in an invalid argument,
 there are gonna be possible situations
 where all of the premises could be true,
 and yet the conclusion is just not guaranteed.
 And then you call those possibilities,
 like the things that might make it the case
 that the conclusion is false,
 we call those counterexamples.
 So here's an example of a counterexample.
 Okay.
 Interesting.
 So suppose that there was some other reason, right?
 This goes back to the question.
 Like, suppose that there's some other reason
 why spice production was wrong.
 So suppose, does it really interact with it?
 Suppose, for example,
 that spice production hurts the wildlife of Arbacus,
 and so there's the desert mouse and the sand worms.
 Then it could still be true
 that spice production does not bring about
 more harm than good to the prey.
 And it could still be true
 that spice production brought about more harm.
 If it did, then it would be wrong.
 But it would be false that using, sorry,
 spice production is not wrong.
 Okay, so a good counterexample is gonna explain
 how it could be possible
 that all the premises of the argument could be true,
 and the conclusion could still be false.
 So in other words, it's gonna do these three things.
 It'll affirm the premises, it'll deny the conclusion,
 and the way that it does that is by saying like,
 look, here's this possibility or possible scenario
 where all the premises are true,
 and the conclusion is still false.
 So when coming up with a counterexample,
 to an invalid argument,
 it could be good or useful to follow this schema.
 And this is from adult reading as well,
 so you might have seen this already.
 I'm not gonna read through this
 'cause it's just basically what I said just a minute ago.
 But this will be available to you
 in the PDF version that's on RuinLearn,
 and so feel free to follow this schema
 if you ever need to.
 Again, I'm just ripping that directly from adult,
 'cause that would probably be helpful.
 Okay, so now we're gonna break for a group activity.
 We're gonna get into like groups of roughly three-ish.
 So please, please don't sit there alone.
 Just talk to someone.
 If you wanna talk to a TA,
 just like hear the TAs at the front of the room.
 Here, oh, and raise your hand, not two.
 One, raise two hands.
 So you can ask them if they've helped with something,
 but really, just try to do this on your own.
 We'll go over all of the examples together.
 Okay, so, and just briefly, before we do this,
 I'm gonna, we'll be passing these out,
 and they're also available on RuinLearn,
 so one person, excuse me, sorry,
 one person will have the card copy for group,
 and it'd be good if you could all write your name
 and your section letter/number or vote combination
 up at the top, 'cause we're gonna send them
 to the front at the end.
 And if you need something to look at,
 it's gonna be hard for everyone
 to look at a lot of physical copy,
 but I've uploaded everything to the Ruin site,
 RuinLearn site, so for the stuff for today,
 it's labeled worksheet, so just click on that,
 and you're gonna be looking at it on your own.
 Okay, so here's the assignment.
 For each of the following arguments,
 they'll say whether the argument is valid or invalid,
 no explanation needed if it's valid.
 If it's invalid, then they'll provide a counter example.
 Now, you know, try to write that out
 like as completely as, you know, makes sense.
 So again, just sort of going back,
 it might look something like this,
 but you needn't do something like this
 if that's gonna sort of take too much time.
 You know, you might just say like the blue card.
 Suppose that, and you just give your counter example,
 and it should sort of be intuitive,
 like, oh yeah, that would make in the case
 that the counter example is true and it would be false.
 So again, just sort of the blue card.
 Suppose that, or counter example, colon,
 like here's what the counter example is.
 That would be sufficient.
 Okay, so say whether it's valid or invalid,
 provide a counter example, and please include your name
 and section number at the top of your name.
 So, we'll go ahead and hand those out.
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 Does this work?
 I also have, but this might not work.
 (audience chattering)
 That works, right?
 (audience chattering)
 You have to hand it back.
 Okay.
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 Okay.
 (audience chattering)
 I don't know what I said, Sean.
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 No proteins, not mice, all the different ones.
 No proteins or electrons, that's all it is.
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 All the electrons are from us.
 (audience chattering)
 Which one is valid?
 (audience chattering)
 Those type of bottles.
 (audience chattering)
 All that has mass, has charge.
 (audience chattering)
 This one's freaker.
 (audience chattering)
 Oh, we should forget about the other one, right?
 (audience chattering)
 That's valid?
 (audience chattering)
 All right, let's do it valid.
 (audience chattering)
 You gotta mess it down with people who are lacking.
 If you've got like an abundance of worksheets,
 there should be enough for the class, you know?
 So, print it out and put it right down.
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 This one?
 (audience chattering)
 Most scientists performed one to the day of diagnosis.
 (audience chattering)
 Kim is a scientist.
 (audience chattering)
 Kim performs one to the table, I think so.
 I think it's valid.
 (audience chattering)
 Okay, if it's a valid, you're about to say why
 it's a valid, right?
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 Okay, let's go with that.
 I'll trust you.
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 All right.
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 Sounds valid.
 (audience chattering)
 Just based on this, if we can, I don't say anything,
 then we can explain it.
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 Are we done?
 (audience chattering)
 I think that this is either or, right?
 Isn't it?
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 Yeah.
 (audience chattering)
 I feel like this is a...
 (audience chattering)
 Yeah, it was like one of the examples.
 Oh, it was?
 Yeah, I thought it was wrong.
 (audience chattering)
 I think it's invalid.
 No.
 If there isn't enough information to--
 (audience chattering)
 To arrive at the conclusion to.
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 Yeah, this is creative.
 (audience chattering)
 I can't go over it right now.
 (audience chattering)
 (audience chattering)
 So, all the grading is?
 Quizzes.
 Quizzes?
 Yeah.
 Quickly quizzes?
 You'll get one this week?
 It's due Monday.
 Oh, it's online?
 Yeah.
 On the website?
 And it's on time, so you have as much time as you want.
 Oh, okay.
 (audience chattering)
 Yeah, I love this class.
 Last quarter I had a class where we had weekly assignments
 and we got redo it until we got a name.
 Yeah, so everyone could get a name.
 Oh my God, wait, so is that the only assignment?
 What is there like with that?
 No, it's just weekly assignments.
 It's just a lot, I think you can take it.
 I think it's just like a new timer,
 but you guys don't tell you that it's not.
 Yeah.
 (audience chattering)
 What's your major?
 Uh, I'm in psychology and politics.
 Political science, yeah.
 What year are you?
 Uh, senior, I'm almost out of here.
 Oh, that's so nice, yeah.
 I took philosophy of psychology last quarter.
 What number are you at?
 Uh, one, let me check.
 (audience chattering)
 What number is it going to be like?
 All exceptions are neither simple nor are neither simple
 and are not simple.
 I guess.
 I think it's 129.
 Yeah, 129.
 What number is that?
 It's about perception.
 Yeah, whole perception.
 It was really interesting.
 Yeah, I've never seen that one, not really.
 You've seen the first one?
 Uh-huh.
 Okay, yeah, that one is upper division, so it's,
 it's a difficult one, yeah.
 Uh, so I'm doing political theory,
 so I do a lot of philosophy, political theory.
 That's why I've been taking philosophy classes all the time.
 (audience chattering)
 I'm applying to law school, so they want to see
 that you're taking philosophy.
 I was taking logic, the first course.
 Oh, yeah, I shouldn't get that word.
 They weren't all great.
 (audience chattering)
 How long have you been taking this course?
 (audience chattering)
 Philosophy 31.
 (audience chattering)
 I guess you have a few years, okay?
 (audience chattering)
 Eventually.
 Yeah, it's basically this, like the whole course
 is about this, and about the, yeah, prisoner.
 And then our homework is on a, it's a program
 that was created in UCLA, so we do our homework there.
 I see how I'm doing my first homework, it's due on Tuesday.
 (audience chattering)
 If you add a comment to the thing,
 like, you didn't take an object in your class.
 Sometimes, like, it's very difficult.
 I'm taking that one, too.
 Oh, then that's, oh, you're taking all of them.
 Which is the best--
 I, well, this one, I'm gonna wait
 for you to release, so I don't know if I can take this one.
 (audience chattering)
 But I'm enrolled in skepticism and rationality,
 and in logic.
 'Cause I need 14 units to graduate,
 but I only wanted to take three classes,
 so I picked two lower divisions,
 'cause it's 10, which is the only colored part.
 (audience chattering)
 All of them, okay, we'll move on.
 Okay, so premise one, to observe something
 is to be able to explain it.
 We cannot observe anything, therefore,
 we cannot explain it.
 Dialing, so, but this was a tricky one, right?
 So one thing is, like I said, I'm taking these examples
 directly from the note, and this sort of way
 of doing things, where it's like too blank is too blank,
 doesn't really make it clear
 that there is a biconditional meaning.
 Yeah, so that way it sort of gets past you.
 The other way to think about it is like,
 well, it's giving a definition.
 What it is to observe something
 is just to be able to explain it.
 So if you can't observe anything,
 if there's nothing that you can observe,
 then there's nothing that you can explain.
 I think you've sort of seen that first tricky premise
 is giving that biconditional, or you could think of it
 as an identity, like observing equals explaining,
 for example, if that was the only conditions,
 or as a definition.
 What it is to observe something is to be able to explain.
 Right, so this was a bit of a tricky one,
 it's kind of put there to stop you,
 but, so, I'm sorry, but, sorry.
 Okay.
 I'm good at it.
 So now, wait, it's a totally different question to ask,
 whether these premises are that true, right?
 Like, another reason why this one might have tripped you up
 is because you're like, what the heck is going on here?
 Like, you can definitely observe stuff and, you know,
 that doesn't mean that we can explain stuff, right?
 So, there's so much around me that I can't explain,
 but that I can observe, right?
 Like, I can observe that the sky's blue,
 and, you know, I know a bit about the science,
 but honestly, if you were to ask me to just, like,
 explain it now, I'm sure that I'd come up short.
 And so, right, P1 and 2 aren't looking very good,
 so what does this mean for the argument, right?
 If it's valid, as we said,
 but it's got at least one false premise,
 this is a review, right?
 It's gonna be on the map.
 Almost through, exercise six,
 premise one says some explanations are simple,
 some explanations are elegant,
 therefore, some explanations are simple and elegant.
 Invalid, sorry, I always, like, nod my head,
 and I'm just having a guess, but no, invalid, right?
 So, suppose that all simple explanations are inelegant,
 and suppose that all elegant explanations are not simple,
 then it would still be the case that some are simple
 and some are elegant, but none are rude.
 Okay.
 Last one.
 DNA contains a code of life, life is sacred,
 therefore, it's wrong to manipulate DNA.
 Invalid.
 Does anyone wanna give their counter example?
 - Yeah, it's because, isn't it that you never outlined that
 in your premises, where you can't, like,
 get at least one of the bases on what I would give
 these numbers and outline them versus this?
 - Yes, but then when you're giving a counter example,
 you wanna specify, like, one of the possible scenarios
 that would make, is it a case that both the premises
 are true, and the conclusion is false,
 so that's the rationale behind why your physics
 are, for example, but it's not a counter example.
 So, I just said, you know, we build sacred altars, right,
 and if they're broken, we might repair them,
 and so in that sort of case, it's not,
 it's built by and to manipulate things that are sacred.
 Alternatively, you could say that, you know,
 manipulating DNA contains the code of life,
 and the code of life itself is sacred thing,
 which means that our ability to do that
 means that we should, right, because it's so sacred.
 This argument doesn't rule out what is possible.
 Okay, so this is a recap.
 We start a fixed event today, and yeah, thank you.
 See you next week.
 (audience applauds)
