 what we are talking about is a first attempt to see sine intuition in a sine point.
 So linear algebra, Originals brought studying linear equations and go beyond.
 So these are the equations that we have encountered in high school.
 For example,
 s plus 2y equals 1 and 3s plus 4y equals 2.
 So a lot of you probably are already familiar with the theory of how to solve this kind of question.
 But the question is, have you ever systematically think about all of the possibilities of linear equations?
 We will start from the first non-trivial example, a 2 by 2 system.
 To see something, let's start from this one.
 So how to solve this equation?
 Well, we can do substitution or eliminate one of the y variables.
 So we can start from the equation 1.
 So say we multiply the first equation by 3 and then subtract second equation to eliminate variable s.
 So what do we get?
 We get 6y minus 4y equals 3 minus 2.
 So we get 1 equals 1.
 Then we can substitute this back to any of the equations 1.
 Plus 2 times 1/2 equals 1.
 So the solution is s1 equals 0, 1.
 You might think, why am I doing this? This is high school algebra.
 But I promise there will be something new behind this example.
 So first, we notice that we get one unique solution, an explicitly computable.
 And we can always check whether the solution is correct or not by plugging it into the system.
 0, 1/2, so this is 1. 0, 1/2, so this is 2.
 Checking something is a solution, it's easy.
 Solving the equation is more difficult.
 So what does this say?
 So let's say this is number 1.
 Now, let's take a look at example 2.
 s plus 2y equals 1.
 3s plus 6y equals 3.
 It looks like a slight variant of the number 1.
 Can we do the same thing again?
 Let's try.
 So once again, we want to do elimination.
 So we multiply the first equation by 3 and then subtract the second equation.
 So we get 3s minus 3s, so s goes away.
 And then we get 6y minus 6y equals 3 minus 2.
 So for the left-hand side, we get 0.
 Right-hand side, we also get 0.
 So what does this mean?
 So it is something unexpected, right?
 Because this time, we didn't get y at the left-hand side.
 All the y goes away when we eliminate s.
 So what should I do next?
 Well, the first thing is probably check whether or not I missed that or not.
 Well, multiply by 3, 3.
 Yeah, it seems like the computation is correct.
 So let's take a look at this expression.
 So it says 0 equals 0.
 Logically, it is correct, right?
 There's nothing wrong with it.
 We didn't really derive any contradiction.
 And in fact, it is an equality that always true.
 So this actually means we have infinitely many solutions here.
 So let me write the solution down first.
 [no audio]
 So it turns out we have a one parameter family of the solutions.
 Given by this form, 1 minus 2t and t.
 t can be any real numbers here.
 So what's going on here?
 When we want to try to eliminate driver s,
 we realize we eliminate all the driver and all the right-hand side.
 So there's no new constraint here.
 The reason is the first equation and the second equation are essentially the same,
 because it's the scalar multiple by 3.
 So second equation is the first equation multiplied by 3.
 So they are equivalent to each other.
 We didn't really get second equation.
 We only had one constraint, which is the first one.
 So as long as I can satisfy the first equation, then I'm done.
 So I can pick y to be anything, and then s will be determined by y,
 which will be 1 minus 2t.
 So we have one degree of the freedom.
 So t can be 0, t can be 1, t can be any real numbers.
 So we have many solutions here.
 So for example, if t is 0, then xy will be 1, 0. If t is 1, xy will be -1, 1.
 If t is 2, xy will be -3, 2.
 You can pick anything you like.
 Now, let's remember.
 It looks like a slight variant from the example 2.
 So maybe it's the same.
 Let's try the same tree again.
 We multiply the first equation by 3, and then subtract the equation 2.
 So once again, x will be eliminated.
 Left-hand side, we also get 6y minus 6y.
 And then right-hand side, we get 3 minus 4.
 So once again, y also goes away in this computation, like example 2.
 So we get 0.
 What about right-hand side?
 This time, we didn't get 0. We actually get -1.
 So what's going on here?
 0 cannot be -1.
 So this is logically incorrect.
 So this means there is no xy that can satisfy the equation.
 Or we will derive some contradiction.
 So this is impossible. This system is not coherent.
 So there's no solution.
 So it looks almost like the last example.
 So for SMY, it differs. Just one scalar market.
 But the right-hand side, we get a different constant.
 So if we multiply the first question by 3, the right-hand side will get 3.
 So if 3x plus 6y is 3, then 3x plus 6y cannot be 4.
 So that's why.
 So in fact, these are three possibilities of the 2 by 2 linear equations.
 In fact, this is the all possible scenario that can happen.
 OK? Why is that true?
 So given a system of linear equations that have two equations and two variables.
 Well, we can always do elimination. Try to eliminate one variable.
 Let's say we eliminate x. Then depending on y.
 Well, sometimes we'll get some non-zero multiple of y.
 Then in this case, we have unique solution, right? Because we can still continue to solve it by dividing that non-zero constant.
 If we get zero y here, then it depends on the right-hand side, whether it's zero or non-zero.
 OK? So these are all possible scenarios that can happen.
 But why do we need to talk about this?
 Since we already know how to stop this question in high school.
 But what about if we had three equations and two unknown variables?
 Or ten equations with ten unknown variables. Or sometimes twenty equations with ten variables.
 Or one hundred equations with one thousand variables. In that case,
 we probably couldn't just do elimination by hand to tell whether it will work or not.
 Also, we are not sure when does the algorithm terminate or whether it will terminate at all.
 So we need a systematic approach to solve linear equations. That is the Gauss equations.
 OK? So the instructor told me that he had karstens law operation in yesterday class.
 OK? So later on, we'll use those law operations to develop one algorithm called Gauss equations.
 They can guarantee solve any linear equations of any size.
 You can have any number of the equations and any number of the unknown variables.
 The algorithm will definitely tell you whether we have solutions or not.
 If we have solutions, how can we compute it? Also, we can talk about the dimension of the solution space.
 Like this one looks like we have one dimensional solution space, right? Because it parametrized by one degree of freedom.
 OK? So, geometrically, what does this number say?
 All the S.Y. satisfy the first question lies on a straight line.
 Because this is the question for a straight line.
 So this is S plus one.
 What about second questions?
 So it also defines a straight line.
 OK?
 So we have two straight lines with different slope. They are not parallel to each other, so they intersect at one point.
 So we have one unique solution, because from a geometric perspective, the solutions means the intersection points, right?
 Because it has to lie on the geometric object defined by the first question and the second question simultaneously.
 Second one.
 So once again, we get a similar question.
 What about the second one?
 So the second question is actually the same as the first question.
 We can plot the S intersection and the Y intersection.
 These two are actually the same line, so they intersect at infinitely many points.
 That's why we have infinitely many solutions. So every point on it would be a solution.
 OK?
 OK.
 So once again, we can plot the S intersection and Y intersection.
 This will be two over three and four over three.
 So these two lines are parallel to each other.
 But they are not the same, so they didn't intersect at all. That's why we don't have any solutions.
 This is the geometry in computations.
 OK.
 So what about a higher dimensional example?
 Now this time, let's say we have three questions.
 So let's say AS plus BY plus CZ equals P.
 AS plus BY plus C equals Q.
 So we get three questions and three unknown variables, S, Y, Z. So A, B, C, D, E, F, H, I, Z, T, Q, R.
 This can be signed. Obviously constant.
 Now, what would happen?
 If we want to solve these equations, well, first we need to have a good algorithm to eliminate forever S, M, Y, M, Z.
 In some order.
 So ideally, probably, we want to use the first question and second question to eliminate whatever S.
 And then second and third one to eliminate whatever S. And then we reduce to two equations with Y and Z, Y and Z.
 And then eliminate whatever Y and Z.
 But what we need to be careful is we need to make sure the system is always equivalent to the last system.
 So we wouldn't get more solutions or less solutions.
 So we do need a systematic approach for this kind of equations.
 When we have a lot of equations and a lot of variables, then we would be not that sure whether we get the actual solutions or not.
 So from the geometric viewpoint, things got much more complicated than that.
 So this question defines.
 So this question defines 10 in the 3D space.
 So we have three questions. So we will define three random hyperfiber.
 Maybe it looks like this.
 So.
 What are the possibility of the intercessions? Things got much more complicated when we move to the three dimensional case.
 Well, first of all, we can have no intercession.
 If we arrange three plane interspace.
 Well, suddenly they had. Well, they might not have intercession at all.
 Well, it can intercess at only one point.
 Then we will have unique solutions.
 It can intercess at infinitely many points.
 It can cut out a line.
 But for the infinitely many solution case, it can also cut out a plane.
 So in the case that we have infinitely many solutions, we even have two distinct possibilities.
 This looks like the solution space is one dimensional. This looks like it's two dimensional.
 It seems that we have much more solutions in this case.
 So the lesson here is when we move to a higher dimensional, when we have many equations and many variables.
 Then things immediately got very complicated. We have many different possibilities.
 So we cannot just solve the equation by hand. We need something systematic.
 There will be Gauss elimination and we will be able to compute the dimension of the solution space.
 Well, so far we haven't defined what is the dimension, but we will do that.
 OK, so so far we only have scientific geometric understanding, like maybe a plane should be two dimensional.
 A line should be one dimensional. Space should be three dimensional.
 Also, the other problem is if we move to four dimensional test, then it will be much more difficult to imagine what's going on.
 Because now we cannot draw the diagram.
 So today is just about the first example. So I just want to demonstrate some phenomena and some flavor of the subject.
 So we don't have any new theory in today's discussion session.
 Hopefully you find this example to be interesting. OK, so any questions?
 Okay, so if there's not any other questions, thank you so much for attending.
